The final type of analytics
we'll discuss in this module
is called Centrality Analysis.
We call something central if it's
in the middle of a larger entity.
We also call something central
if it's important and vital.
For graphs, we'll identify important
notes by looking at how central they are.
In the graph.
Look at the the six node graph,
you don't have to know a lot
to figure out that the orange
node is pretty important, Why?
Well, one reason could be it's
the most vulnerable node.
If you remove it the graph
will fall apart.
because this is clearly one way to
look at the centrality of the node.
But it's not the only way.
Another way of looking at the orange node,
is that it can reach all other
nodes quicker, than any other node.
So this is the idea behind influences.
People in a social network who
are connected enough to reach out and
possibly influence a lot more
people than others will be able to.
If the little graph represents
a transportation network.
And you were asked to build a restaurant
somewhere around this network.
You'll possibly choose an area
near the central node.
Because more traffic will flow
through this node than other nodes.
And some of them will get
out at the station and
bring business to your restaurant.
We can give many more examples.
In biological networks,
house-keeping genes are genes needed for
the maintenance of basic
cellular function, and
are expressed in all cells of
an organism under normal and
abnormal conditions, these genes
are central because they're vital and
they're connected to many other
nodes in the biological network.
So much so that they need to
be taken out of the network so
that the rest of
the network can be studied.
Out of all these examples,
we'll focus on a kind of problem
researchers have called
the key player problem.
The problem comes in two flavors.
Now take a little time to
read the two examples.
The first is sort of a negative piece.
We have a network and we are trying
to find a small subset of people
who's removal will maximally
disrupt the network.
The key operative word here is maximally.
So if there is a node which removal
breaks the network into two parts,
it is not what we want if
there's another two nodes
whose removal will break
the network into ten parts.
The second case, however,
is a lot more conventional.
The goal is to find a small set of nodes
with maximal combined reachability
to other nodes.
That means, taken together, these nodes
should reach almost all other nodes.
You should know that
people use two terms to
characterize a general concept
of network centrality.
The first one, centrality,
is about a node.
It measures how central the node
is with respect to the network.
So the orange node in the left
graph has high centrality, and
the blue nodes have low centrality.
The second term, centralization,
is about the network.
Now look at the graph on the right,
where the dark orange node is still very
central for the light orange node, and
between the other nodes, and
therefore has reasonable centrality.
As more nodes start
having higher centrality,
the centralization of the network drops
because there is less variation in
the centrality values of the network.
So for each type of centrality that we
discuss next we can compute the network
centralization by considering the sum
of the difference between the maximum
centrality and the centrality of the node
divided by the maximum centrality.
There are thirty different
measures of centrality.
We will consider only a few of them and
explore the conceptual
principles supported here.
The first and the most intuitive
measure is degree centrality.
Quick measures, the degree of a node
divided by the possible edges it
could have if it connected to each of
the other N- 1 nodes in the graph.
Now, we have seen this before.
This measure gives us a sense
of the hubness of the node.
The higher the number is,
the more hub-like the node is.
Thinking of our second key player problem.
One way to approach this is to
find a hub-like measure for
a group with multiple nodes.
Instead of measuring the degree
centrality of individual nodes,
the measure simply counts the number of
edges coming into the group as a whole
compared to the number of outsiders.
In our example two red nodes here
together connect to all blue nodes.
Although there is just one
node neighboring both of them.
Closeness centrality takes a different
approach to the centrality problem.
It acts the shortest distance
of a node to all other nodes and
divides it by a minus one.
So in our graph, a node like I,
which is on the periphery of the graph,
will be quite far from
all nodes in general, and
therefore will have a very high
closeness centrality value.
On the other hand, nodes like F, C and
H are much closer to all other nodes.
Know that we define this measure
in terms of shortest paths.
So if a moving object, like information,
flows to the shortest path
in the network, F is more likely to
receive them earlier than other nodes.
And therefore can process into
other nodes more quickly.
Therefore.
If we look to inject a new piece of
information into the network with the idea
that it should read every other node
quickly, I should possibly inject it at F.
Recall however, that node information
flow is two shortest routes.
An example is gossip, that tends to
travel through centrality nodes.
Closeness centrality does not work well
for these types of information nodes.
Another very popular centrality measure
is called betweenness centrality.
For any node it measures the fraction of
shortest paths flowing through that node.
Compared to the number of
shortest paths in the graph.
Since B is at one end,
its between a centrality is 0.
But let's look at A.
A is in the path from B to E.
So is D.
Therefore, A's score for
the B to E path is 0.5.
Similarly, its score for the C to E path
is also 0.5, making the total score 1.
E is in the path from A to D,
for there is one more
path from A to do through C,
so E's score is 0.5.
Now can you verify why C's score is 3.5?
Betweenness centrality
is typically used for
problem where a commodity is
flowing through the network.
As in the case of closeness centrality.
Any quantity that does not flow in
shortest path channels like infection or
rumor on the internet doesn't work
well with betweeness centrality.